Vitess mysql group replication (#1141)
vitessio/website: content/en/blog/2022-08-25-vitess-group-replication.md

> # VTGR: Vitess with Group Replication

Reviewer: Needs a header similar to other blog posts. Especially the keywords.

Author: Added

## Introduction

> MySQL group replication is a new replication mechanism that was released in 2016. Group replication involves establishing a group of nodes that are coordinated automatically via Group Communication System (GCS) protocols, a protocol built on top of Paxos. For a transaction to commit, the majority of the group have to agree on the order of a given transaction in the global sequence of transactions. Deciding to commit or abort a transaction is done by each server individually, but all servers make the same decision. In addition, group replication also provides automatic failover within a group. That is, group replication will detect failures on the node and modify the group membership accordingly by itself [[0](https://dev.mysql.com/doc/refman/8.0/en/group-replication-background.html)].

Reviewer: "a protocol built on top of Paxos" - Isn't this really an implementation of Paxos or at least "built on top of an implementation of Paxos"?
From MySQL 8.0 docs
```
All of this is powered by the provided Group Communication System (GCS) protocols. These provide a failure detection mechanism, a group membership service, and safe and completely ordered message delivery. All these properties are key to creating a system which ensures that data is consistently replicated across the group of servers. At the very core of this technology lies an implementation of the Paxos algorithm. It acts as the group communication engine.
```

Reviewer: I believe "the majority of the group have to agree" should be "a majority of the group has to agree"

Author: Changed to "an implementation of Paxos"

With the addition of group replication, there are now three popular replication mechanisms in MySQL: async-replication, semi-sync replication and (as we mentioned) group replication. However, Vitess only supports two of these out of the box with vtorc: async-replication and semi-sync replication. Although they are both battle tested, there are still issues with them: 
the async-replication cannot guarantee strong consistency during a failover, the new primary may not apply an update yet and it can serve stale data. 
for semi-sync replication, it needs sophisticated orchestration tooling to make sure the new primary has the latest update, the failover process could be error prone.

This means that two pieces of interesting technology, Vitess and MySQL group replication, do not play along with each other. This was the motivation to develop VTGR: an orchestration component that integrates Vitess and group replication.
## Vitess

> Vitess adds two more components in the serving path: vtgate and vttablet. vtgate is a proxy layer of a Vitess cluster, it knows how to route the query based on schema. vttablet is the component that runs together with the mysqld process. vttablet is the one that manages the mysqld for a shard and it talks to mysqld via local sockets. vttablet has different types [[1](https://vitess.io/docs/concepts/tablet/)], the primary tablet needs to sit on top of a writable mysqld. Thus, write requests have to be routed to primary tablets.

Reviewer: The convention has been VTGate and VTTablet. If you use all lowercase you have the problem of whether or not to capitalize (Vtgate/Vttablet) at the beginning of each sentence.

Author: Sounds good, updated

> https://vitess.io/files/2019-sugu-highload.pdf#viewer.action=download

Reviewer: This link/file seems to be dangling. Did you mean to include it here?

Author: removed

Reviewer: It's still around

A replication group constitutes a shard. Nodes within a shard share the same data through replication. The membership of the shard is stored in a topology server.
## Group replication

> Group replication can be operated either in single primary mode or multi primary mode. In single primary mode, there is only one primary mysqld that is writable, everyone else is read only replicas.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Group replication can be operated either in single primary mode or multi primary mode. In single primary mode, there is only one primary mysqld that is writable, all others are read only replicas.
```

Author: done

> The single primary mode shares a common ground that there is a single writable node. All replicas will replicate from the primary after there is a consensus within the group. Things are easier to reason about with a single writable node and that’s what we chose to start with.

Reviewer: I didn't understand the first sentence. what does it share common ground with?

Reviewer: Also, it is worth noting that Vitess _DOES NOT_ support multi-primary mode, nor are there any plans to do so.

Author: Reworded to make it simpler.

> Also, it is worth noting that Vitess DOES NOT support multi-primary mode, nor are there any plans to do so.

That's OK, Vitess can still be single primary but the underneath group can be multi-primary

## VTGR
VTGR is a stateless orchestration component that glues Vitess with group replication. It acts a bit like a mechanic on an assembly line, checking the functioning of the system and repairing parts of it as needed. For every shard, VTGR will periodically pull Vitess topology and mysql group for diagnosis. Based on the diagnosed result, VTGR will execute corresponding repair actions. 
<td> 
  <p style="padding: 10px">
  <img src="/files/2022-08-25-vitess-group-replication/architecture.jpeg" alt="VTGR architecture" style="width:400px"/>
  <br>
</p>
</td>
### Key capabilities

> At high level, VTGR provides two key capabilities: 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
VTGR provides two key capabilities: 
```

Author: Updated

**Group maintenance**

> After collection information from the topology server and all the nodes within the shard:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
After collecting information from the topology server and all the nodes within the shard:
```

If there is no active MySQL group, VTGR will bootstrap one.

> If there is a replica in the shard that is not in the group, VTGR will add the node into the group.

Reviewer: you seem to be using replica and node interchangeably, that could be confusing to a reader.

Author: Use replica in both places here

**Automatic failover**

> Since the MySQL group will do failover automatically, VTGR is responsible for reconciling Vitess and MySQL group to make sure the primary VTTablet is pointing to a writable mysqld. To do that, VTGR uses group information to identify primary SQLnodes and compare with the primary tablet from the topology server:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The MySQL group will failover automatically. VTGR is responsible for reconciling Vitess and the MySQL group to make sure that the primary VTTablet is pointing to a writable mysqld. To do that, VTGR uses group information to identify primary SQL nodes and compare them with the primary tablet from the topology server:
```

Reviewer: Not sure whether "them" is correct in this suggestion ☝️ but you did say "nodes"

Reviewer: maybe instead it should be "identify the primary SQL node and compare them with the primary tablet from the topology server". After all it is single-primary mode

Author: Yep, also I switched to `it` instead of them since there should be only one primary

If there is no primary tablet, VTGR will set the primary according to the MySQL group.
If the primary tablet is not pointing to a writable primary SQL node, VTGR will change the primary according to the MySQL group.
If the primary tablet crashes but the mysqld underneath is still running, VTGR will failover the MySQL group first and then change the primary tablet accordingly.

> From our test, we observe about 8 seconds of downtime for an unplanned failover.

Reviewer: This last sentence should go into the Performance section, here it breaks the flow of the functional description.

Author: Removed since we already mentioned 8 sec in performance section

The failover behavior above can be captured in the following activity diagram:
<td> 
  <p style="padding: 10px">
  <img src="/files/2022-08-25-vitess-group-replication/activity.png" alt="VTGR activity flow" style="width:400px"/>
  <br>
</p>
</td>
### Performance

> The group replication is configured in single primary mode. From our experiment, VTGR only introduces very small overhead. An unplanned primary failover takes about 8 seconds to finish and majority of the time was spent by MySQL group itself. This means within a healthy AWS region, our storage layer can recover from a node failure (e.g., disk failure, network failure, etc) in 8 seconds, this provides us with a baseline for availability and reliability for future improvements for our customers.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Group replication is configured in single primary mode. From our experiment, VTGR only introduces a very small amount of overhead. An unplanned primary failover takes about 8 seconds to finish and the majority of the time was spent by MySQL group itself. This means within a healthy AWS region, our storage layer can recover from a node failure (e.g., disk failure, network failure, etc) in 8 seconds, this provides us with a baseline for availability and reliability for future improvements for our customers.
```

> Future works

Reviewer: Should be a heading

> Future works

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Future improvements
```

The existing VTGR has run through multiple rounds of integration testing and chaos testing, but there is more work to be done:
The current version of VTGR only supports group replication in single primary mode. It would be valuable to explore the multi-primary mode in the future, which should provide lower failover time.

> There are strict compatibility requirements for a MySQL group. Currently, we need to instruct VTGR to follow those rules to support operations like version upgrade.

Reviewer: What is the possible improvement here?

Author: When we do fanout to collect mysql group info, we should also collect mysql_version as well, so that we can add version into considerations as well

Reviewer: Then maybe add a sentence at the end saying something like "This can be improved."

## Summary
It is subjective which MySQL replication mechanism fits your use case better. But VTGR bridges the gap between Vitess and group replication, making it possible to do horizontal sharding easily with group replication. 

This project has benefited a lot from the entire OSS community and VTGR has now been accepted by Vitess upstream officially. We are always looking forward to getting feedback from the community.
## Acknowledgements

> This work wouldn’t have been possible without continuous advice and support from various people from the community: Deepthi Sigireddi, Harish Mallipeddi, Meng Wang, Shlomi Noach, and Sugu Sougoumarane.

Reviewer: 🙇‍♀️

With the addition of group replication, there are now three popular replication mechanisms in MySQL: async-replication, semi-sync replication and (as we mentioned) group replication. However, Vitess only supports two of these out of the box with vtorc: async-replication and semi-sync replication. Although they are both battle tested, there are still issues with them: 
the async-replication cannot guarantee strong consistency during a failover, the new primary may not apply an update yet and it can serve stale data. 
for semi-sync replication, it needs sophisticated orchestration tooling to make sure the new primary has the latest update, the failover process could be error prone.

This means that two pieces of interesting technology, Vitess and MySQL group replication, do not play along with each other. This was the motivation to develop VTGR: an orchestration component that integrates Vitess and group replication.
## Vitess

> Vitess adds two more components in the serving path: VTGate and VTTablet. VTGate is a proxy layer of a Vitess cluster, it knows how to route the query based on schema. VTTablet is the component that runs together with the mysqld process. VTTablet is the one that manages the mysqld for a shard and it talks to mysqld via local sockets. VTTablet has different types, the primary tablet needs to sit on top of a writable mysqld. Thus, write requests have to be routed to primary tablets.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Vitess adds two more components in the serving path: VTGate and VTTablet. VTGate is a proxy layer of a Vitess cluster, it knows how to route the query based on the schema and VSchema. VTTablet is the component that runs together with the mysqld process. VTTablet is the one that manages the mysqld for a shard and it talks to mysqld via local sockets. VTTablet has different types, the primary tablet needs to sit on top of a writable mysqld. Thus, write requests have to be routed to primary tablets.
```

Reviewer: can you hyperlink `VSchema` to docs?

Author: sure
